In this video, we'll learn
about c-style strings.
C-style strings are about
as simple as it gets.
They're a sequence of characters,
stored contiguously in memory.
They're implemented as an array
of characters, so you can access
individual characters using
the array subscript syntax
that we've already learned.
How do you know where the
sequence of characters ends.
C-style strings use a sentinel valley
that marks the end of the string.
The null character is used, which
is equivalent to the integer zero.
So c-style strings are often referred
to as zero or null terminated strings.
We've been using c-style strings
all along in this course.
We've used them mainly in our output
statements as string literals.
Recall that string literals
are sequences of characters
enclosed in double quotes.
These string literals are constants,
so we can't change them just like
we can't change integer literals.
Even though we don't explicitly
provide a null character at
the end of the string literal,
c++ inserts one for us.
That's the way the end
of string is handled.
Let's see an example of a string
literal and how it's stored in memory.
Here's a real simple example
that shows how c-style
strings are stored in memory.
In this case, we have a c-style
string literal containing the
sequence of characters c++ is fun.
These characters are stored in a
contiguous block of memory that
can be accessed as an array.
Notice that c++ is fun has exactly
10 characters, but the compiler
allocated 11 characters for the
array because it needed space for
the null character at the end.
Literals are great and very
useful, but we more often than not
need to create string variables.
Let's see how we can create
c-style string variables.
In this example, we're declaring
an array and initializing it
to Frank, using initializer
list syntax as we've been doing
with integers and other types.
Notice that the c++ compiler will
allocate six characters for this
array since it needs to terminate
the string with the null character.
Also notice that the size
of the array is fixed.
So if I wanted to add a y to Frank
and create Franky, I couldn't
without having some potential
problems since the new string
would not be null terminated.
You won't get a compiler
error or even a warning.
In fact, in this case, my name sub-5
is still within the array bounds.
Let's see another example.
In this example, we are explicitly
asking the compiler to allocate eight
characters for the character array.
And we're initializing it to Frank.
In this case, it will initialize
the array with f r a n k,
and the rest of the space will be
zeroed out with null characters.
In this case, if I wanted to change
the character at index 5, which
is that first null character to
a lowercase y, it would be just
fine since the string now contains
Franky and is still null terminated.
Let's see another example.
In this example, we ask the
compiler to allocate an array
of eight characters, and
we don't initialize them.
This could be very problematic
because if you use this array as a
string, all c-style string functions
expect to find a null character.
And here there may or may not be one.
We really don't know what
the data in the array is.
Suppose we wanted to
display the string now.
How do you think this would
happen, how do you think
c-style strings are displayed.
Well, in this case we start at
the first element of the array
and we iterate through the array.
At every character, we see
if it's the null character.
If it is, we stop since we
reach the end of the string.
If it's not, we print the
character and then we move
to the next character.
In this case, we don't know
what's going to happen.
We might see a null right
away or we might not see a
null for a very long time.
In the meantime, I'm
printing stuff to the screen.
Some of the stuff may not
even be displayable since some
characters are control characters.
You might think we can initialize
c-style strings using the assignment
operator, just like we have with
other types, but this won't work.
If we try to assign the c-style
literal Frank to my name, we get
a compiler error because that's
not the way c-style strings work.
Array names and literals evaluate
to their location in memory, so
we're effectively assigning one
location to another which is illegal.
Think of this as
saying assign 10 to 12.
It doesn't make sense and
the compiler won't allow it.
In order to assign one string
to another, we need to use a
function called string copy.
That copies the c-style literal
f r a n k to the my name array.
There are lots of c-style
functions that c++ plus brings in
from the c programming language.
Let's see a few of them.
The cstring library contains
many functions that work
with c-style strings.
These functions are used to copy,
concatenate, compare, search, get
the length of a string and many more.
They all rely on one common
factor that the sequence of
characters they're working on is
terminated with a null character.
If you're using c-style strings,
you must be very aware of this.
For example, suppose you
have a c-style string and you
want to determine its length.
Well, let's say we have Frank.
Since no length information is
stored with the string only the
characters in the array, the only
way to determine the length is to
start counting at the first array
element and then increment the longest
until you see the null character.
So in the case of Frank, we
would look at the f, increment
one, look at the r, two, the a,
three the, n four, the k five.
Then we see a null
character, and we stop.
Now we know that the length is five.
But if that null character
is not there, we keep
going and we keep counting.
So the result will very likely be
incorrect, even worse if you're
copying one string into another and
the string you're copying isn't null
terminated, you'll very likely exceed
the bounds of the target string and
very likely cause a program crash.
This all sounds pretty ominous.
But in fact, we've been programming
in c and c++ plus using c-style
strings for a very long time,
and we've gotten pretty good
at understanding these issues.
But wouldn't it be great
if we didn't have to worry
about these issues at all.
That's where c++ strings come in.
We'll talk about them
later in this section.
Here a few examples that use
the c-style string functions.
You typically have a function, and you
pass into the function the name of the
string or the string literal or both.
We'll talk about functions
in detail shortly.
But conceptually, they're
really easy to understand.
For example, If I'm a function and my job
is to return the color of a
crayon passed to me, then all
i need from you is the crayon.
So you call me and send me
the crayon, and I'll return
red, green, blue and so forth.
That's the idea, and
here it's the same.
If you want to know the length
of the string, pass in the string
to the strlen function, and it
returns the string's length.
Here are just a few examples that
copy, concatenate and compare strings.
C++ also has another library called c
standard lib that contains functions
that convert strings to other types.
For example, if I have a string
with the digits 1 and 2, I can
convert that to the integer 12.
Sometimes these are
really useful functions.
However, all of these functions
rely on the same thing.
They're all working with
null terminated strings.
If you're using c-style strings,
you have to be very aware of that.
Well that completes this video.
In the next video, we'll head over
to the IDE, and we'll write some
examples using c-style strings.